Many therapists who work with patients who have had a brain injury (BI) include game to ameliorate boredom associated with repetitive rehabilitation exercises. However, designing effective, appropriate, and engaging game for BI therapy is challenging. Following a user-centered approach we created GaPBIT (Game Design Patterns for BI Therapy), a prototype tool that leveraged design patterns to support designer-therapist collaboration when ideating game for BI therapy. We observed the use of GaPBIT in six game ideation workshops that involved game designers and therapists. The tool effectively facilitated collaboration in the interdisciplinary teams. Findings also suggested that information tools like GaPBIT support but do not replace informative collaboration among designers and subject-matter experts (, therapists in our study). We argue that our findings and research methodology generalize to other domains where communication and collaboration among interdisciplinary design teams are imperative for designing "successful" game;  game that meet the varied goals among stakeholders.

Developers maintaining safety-critical systems need to assess the impact a proposed change would have upon existing safety controls. By leveraging the network of traceability links that are present in most safety-critical systems, we can push timely information about related hazards, environmental assumptions, and safety requirements to developers. In this work we take a design science approach to discover the informational needs of developers as they engage in software maintenance activities and then propose and evaluate techniques for presenting and visualizing this information. Through a human-centered study involving five safety-critical system practitioners and 14 experienced developers, we analyze the way in which developers use requirements knowledge while maintaining safety-critical code, identify their informational needs, and propose and evaluate a supporting visualization technique. The insights proposed as a result of this study can be used to design requirements-based knowledge tools for supporting developers' maintenance tasks.

In most safety-critical domains the need for trace-ability is prescribed by certifying bodies. Trace links are generally created among requirements, design, source code, test cases and other artifacts; however, creating such links manually is time consuming and error prone. Automated solutions use information retrieval and machine learning techniques to generate trace links; however, current techniques fail to understand semantics of the software artifacts or to integrate domain knowledge into the tracing process and therefore tend to deliver imprecise and inaccurate results. In this paper, we present a solution that uses deep learning to incorporate requirements artifact semantics and domain knowledge into the tracing solution. We propose a tracing network architecture that utilizes Word Embedding and Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) models to generate trace links. Word embedding learns word vectors that represent knowledge of the domain corpus and RNN uses these word vectors to learn the sentence semantics of requirements artifacts. We trained 360 different configurations of the tracing network using existing trace links in the Positive Train Control domain and identified the Bidirectional Gated Recurrent Unit (BI-GRU) as the best model for the tracing task. BI-GRU significantly out-performed state-of-the-art tracing methods including the Vector Space Model and Latent Semantic Indexing.

Serious game for health utilize game media to help players attain health-related goals. Game designers play a crucial role in this growing game genre; they focus on particularly challenging design problems that are not well represented in the literature. In this study, we interviewed 11 professional game designers focused on game for health to explore how they perceived and approached their work. Our findings revealed how our participants considered "success" and the challenges of designing game for health; we also identified various methods and tools used in their practice. Additionally, we found that our participants were very user-centric and tended to focus almost equally on the problem and the solution spaces when approaching game design. The insights presented in this study will be of interest to game for health researchers and designers. This work also contributes to bridging the research-practice gap in the community exploring game as purposeful media.

Brain injury (BI) is recognized as a major health issue. It is common for therapists to include commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) game in their therapies to help motivate patients who have had a BI engage in rehabilitation tasks. In this paper, we present a prototype 'Choose a Game' tool that focuses on helping therapists select appropriate game that match their therapeutic goals and patient attributes. The tool leveraged a knowledge-base that we created about COTS game use in BI therapy. We evaluated the prototype through user studies with 29 therapists at two rehabilitation hospitals. While further improvements are needed, the tool enabled therapists to use game from a wider range of selections and therapists were generally satisfied with the game recommendations and the tool's user experience. This project is also a demonstration of a novel research model for investigating domains where technologies are rapidly proliferating for users with wide-ranging attributes such as the domain of therapeutic gaming for BI rehabilitation.

game are often used in brain injury (BI) therapy sessions to help motivate patients to engage in rehabilitation activities. In this paper, we explore game design patterns as a mechanism to help game designers understand needs in BI therapy. Design patterns, originating from the work of Christopher Alexander, aim to provide a common language to support the creative work of designers by documenting solutions that have successful addressed recurring design problems. Through analyzing data we gathered on the use of commercial game in BI therapy, we generated a list of 14 'efficacy-centered game design patterns' that focused on game design considerations when addressing therapeutic goals in BI rehabilitation. We argue that our patterns can serve as a common language to support the design of BI rehabilitation game; additionally, our data-driven approach sets up a paradigm for generating game design patterns in related areas.

Brain injuries (BI) are recognized as a major public health issue. Many therapists include commercial motion-based videogame in their therapy sessions to help make rehabilitation exercises fun and engaging. Our initial exploratory work exposed a need for tools to help therapists make evidence-based decisions when choosing commercial motion-game for their patients who have had a BI. Targeting this need, we are gathering requirements for a case-based recommender (CBR) system that will act as a decision tool for therapists. In this paper, we describe our ongoing work as a case study that illustrates our multi-method approach of requirement elicitation for the CBR system. Our approach is comprised of four overlapping steps: (1) interviews with therapists, (2) onsite observations of therapy game sessions, (3) diary studies in which therapists record detailed information about game sessions, and (4) a user study of a CBR prototype interface. Leveraging direct interaction with end users (, therapists), this case study demonstrates requirements gathering techniques to address needs of a special population (, therapists who work with patients who had BIs) in a specialized context (, inpatient rehabilitation using motion-based video game).

In this paper, we present survey findings about how user experience (UX) and human-computer interaction (HCI) professionals, who create information and communication technologies (ICTs), reported considering accessibility in their work. Participants (N = 199) represented a wide range of job titles and nationalities. We found that most respondents (87%, N = 173) reported that accessibility was important or very important in their work; however, when considerations for accessibility were discussed in an open-ended question (N =185) the scope was limited. Additionally, we found that aspects of empathy and professional experience were associated with how accessibility considerations were reported. We also found that many respondents indicated that decisions about accessibility were not in their control. We argue that a better understanding about how accessibility is considered by professionals has implications for academic programs in HCI and UX as to how well programs are preparing students to consider and advocate for inclusive design.

Usability is a fundamental type of non-functional requirements (NFRs) that specifies how easy, efficient, errorpreventing,
and pleasant a software system must be to be used by human users. The importance of usability is
increasingly pervasive in the modern software engineering projects. Because of the unique characteristics of
usability NFRs, however, software development teams often experience considerable challenges in managing
this type of NFRs, limiting their ability in creating more successful products for their users. First, usability and
user interaction are complex issues that rely on diverse factors that require effective collaboration from
multidisciplinary software development stakeholders, which is usually difficult to achieve. Second, resource and
skill-demanding activities such as iterative prototyping and user studies are indispensable in identification,
evolution, verification, and validation of usability NFRs. There is currently little methodology and tool support
in facilitating the multidisciplinary collaboration and the iterative activities in managing usability NFRs.
The long-term objective of this research program is to address this gap by investigating, developing, and
deploying methods, models, and tools for usability NFRs management in collaborative and iterative
environments. In the next five years, this research targets five short-term objectives: (1) accumulating
practitioners’ knowledge about usability NFRs management, (2) constructing a taxonomy and an ontology of
usability “bad smells” as a common vocabulary for discussing usability concepts, (3) creating a usability NFRs
modeling scheme to support multidisciplinary communication, (4) exploring semi-automated methods for
usability NFRs identification and construction, and (5) creating and evaluating a usability NFRs lifecycle
management tool. To achieve these objectives, we (my students and I) will work closely with industrial
practitioners in order to measure the impact of our findings in practice. This research is motivated by and
extends my recent work on techniques to support software stakeholders’ collaborative consideration on
usability and user experience issues in serious game and other domains.
The outcomes from this research program will increase our theoretical and practical knowledge about usability
NFRs, broadening the adoption of usability engineering, especially in areas in which usability is becoming an
emerging concern. The methods, models, and tools resulted from this research will directly benefit the Canadian
industry, allowing companies to streamline their usability engineering process and create more successful
products. Last but not least, this research program will train four HQPs, including two PhD and two Master
students, allowing them to gain extensive hands-on experience in empirical research and user-centered design
and development.
